Add how-to for sending alerts to OpsGenie (#17)
appuio/component-openshift4-monitoring: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/opsgenie.adoc

= Integrating Alertmanager with OpsGenie

This how-to assumes that you're already using OpsGenie.
It additionally assumes that you're familiar with managing schedules and escalations.

== Prerequisites

In order to setup Alertmanager integration with OpsGenie, you'll need sufficient permissions in OpsGenie to setup integrations and heartbeats.
If you're using teams in OpsGenie, request role "admin" in your team to be able to follow along.

== Configuring the integration in OpsGenie

In OpsGenie, navigate to "Teams > Your Team > Integrations" and enable the Prometheus and REST API integrations.
You can use the same integrations to receive alerts from multiple Alertmanagers.

> Save the API keys which are generated when enabling the integrations in Vault, we'll reference them from the Commodore hierarchy.

Reviewer: Please provide the path where to put those whalues. It is mentioned down below but having to jump back and forth is anoying.

In the REST API integration enable "Read Access" and "Create and Update Access."
The REST API integration is required for heartbeat alerts, such as the "Watchdog" alert.

Configure a heartbeat in "Teams > Your Team > Heartbeats" to receive `Watchdog` alerts as heartbeats in OpsGenie.
Create a new heartbeat, the name can be whatever you'd like.

> We suggest using the Commodore `<cluster-id>` of the cluster you're integrating with OpsGenie as the heartbeat nam e.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We suggest using the Commodore `<cluster-id>` of the cluster you're integrating with OpsGenie as the heartbeat name.
```

Set the heartbeat interval to two minutes.
Optionally, you can add the cluster's display name (or any other descriptive name for the cluster) in the heartbeat's description field.

> 

Reviewer: Please make it more explicit, that there must be one heartbeat per cluster. While there is only one Prometheus and API integration required per team.

Author: restructured the OpsGenie integration section. Is it clearer now?

== Configuring Alertmanager to send alerts to OpsGenie

To configure Alertmanager to send alerts to OpsGenie we need to configure an Alertmanager receiver using Alertmanager's `opsgenie` integration.
First, we need to configure the `opsgenie_api_key` in the `global` section of the Alertmanager config.
For the global API key you'll want to reference the Vault secret holding the API key for the Prometheus integration.

[source,yaml]
----
openshift4_monitoring:
  alertManagerConfig:
    global:
      opsgenie_api_key: ?{vaultkv:${cluster:tenant}/${cluster:name}/opsgenie/api-key}
----

Next, we need to configure the OpsGenie receiver.
First off, we want to set our team as the responder for all the alerts received from Alertmanager.

> We recommend that you use the team's UUID for configuring the responders, as the UUID remains stable even if the team name is changed.

Reviewer: Please mention where to find that UUID. So far, I have copied it from the URL. Maybe there is another way to get it.

Reviewer 2: It can also be the team's name, instead of the UUID.

We also configure the OpsGenie receiver as the default receiver.

[source,yaml]
----
openshift4_monitoring:
  alertManagerConfig:
    receivers:
      - name: opsgenie
        opsgenie_configs:
          - responders:
              - id: <team-uuid>
                type: team
    route:
      receiver: opsgenie
----

Additionally, we configure a number of things to make use of Project Syn and Openshift4 conventions in the alerts which are created in OpsGenie.

> In order for the snippets discussed below to work correctly, we need to group alerts by `alertname`, `namespace`, and `severity` at least.

Reviewer: This is subject to discuss and teams are free to handle this differently. Can you clarify that this is a common ground to start with?

Author: That we need to discuss this internally and that our teams are free to do something different is out of scope for this how-to/PR. In general, a how-to should always be taken as a starting point for building a configuration that meets the needs of the person/organization who consumes it.

Grouping alerts by *at least* `alertname`, `namespace` and `severity` is mandatory in the scope of this how-to, as otherwise the `.GroupLabels` references in the configuration presented by the how-to will not work correctly.

[source,yaml]
----
openshift4_monitoring:
  alertManagerConfig:
    receivers:
      - name: opsgenie
        opsgenie_configs:
          - description: |-
              {{ if gt (len .Alerts.Firing) 0 -}}
              Alerts Firing:
              {{ range .Alerts.Firing }}
               - Message: {{ .Annotations.message }}
                 Labels:
              {{ range .Labels.SortedPairs }}   - {{ .Name }} = {{ .Value }}
              {{ end }}   Annotations:
              {{ range .Annotations.SortedPairs }}   - {{ .Name }} = {{ .Value }}
              {{ end }}   Source: {{ .GeneratorURL }}
              {{ end }}
              {{- end }}
              {{ if gt (len .Alerts.Resolved) 0 -}}
              Alerts Resolved:
              {{ range .Alerts.Resolved }}
               - Message: {{ .Annotations.message }}
                 Labels:
              {{ range .Labels.SortedPairs }}   - {{ .Name }} = {{ .Value }}
              {{ end }}   Annotations:
              {{ range .Annotations.SortedPairs }}   - {{ .Name }} = {{ .Value }}
              {{ end }}   Source: {{ .GeneratorURL }}
              {{ end }}
              {{- end }}
----

> To make alerts filterable, we add a number of key-value pairs as `details` and a number of values as `tags`.

Reviewer: Can you add a reference to the change @srueg mentioned? The one that automatically adds all tags as details.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/prometheus/alertmanager/pull/2276

If you followed our suggestion and used the Commodore `cluster-id` as the name for the heartbeat the snippet below will work out of the box.
For this receiver you need to provide the API key of the REST API integration, which should be stored in Vault.

In addition to the receiver, we also add a routing configuration to match alerts which are called `Watchdog` and ensure they're sent to the `heartbeat` receiver with a repeat interval of one minute (60 seconds).

[source,yaml]
----
openshift4_monitoring:
  alertManagerConfig:
    receivers:
      - name: heartbeat
        webhook_configs:
          - send_resolved: false
            url: https://api.opsgenie.com/v2/heartbeats/${cluster:name}/ping
            http_config:
              basic_auth:
                password: ?{vaultkv:${cluster:tenant}/${cluster:name}/opsgenie/heartbeat-password}
    route:
      routes:
        - match:
            alertname: Watchdog
          repeat_interval: 60s
          receiver: heartbeat
----

== Full component configuration

Since we've discussed individual elements of the Alertmanager configuration in the previous section, here's the full, copy-pasteable configuration.

> [source,yaml]

Reviewer: I wonder if and were we could put this or part of it, into our global config hierarchy. This is a good docoumentation to have.

Author: Having it in the internal global config hierarchy doesn't help other users of Project Syn, and is therefore out of scope for this PR.
